nyt960108.0493 A5852 BC-BALLOON-RACE-2ndTAKE- 01-08 0745 BC-BALLOON-RACE-2ndTAKE-NYT
UNDATED: daylight hours. Shortly after Fossett 's launching Monday his competitors sent
him telegrams of congratulation. The British balloon, called the Virgin Global Challenger, is to
be flown by Richard Branson , chairman of Virgin Atlantic Airways ; Per Lindstrand , chairman of Lindstrand Balloons Ltd. of Oswestry , England , and an Irish balloonist, Rory McCarthy . Branson and Lindstrand , who have set several ballooning records,
were the first pilots of hot-air balloons to cross both the Atlantic Ocean , in 1987 , and the Pacific , in 1991 . Lindstrand said that because of unfavorable weather patterns
over England he and his colleagues had decided to launch their Virgin Global Challenger from a military airfield at Marrakech , Morocco . To move the big crew capsule, balloon and accessories, the
British group chartered a Beluga transport plane  &MD  a modified Airbus 300 similar to the Pregnant Guppy aircraft used by NASA to
transport large rocket components. The flight to Morocco is
scheduled for Friday , and Lindstrand said the balloon launching
would probably take place a day or so later . Branson , chairman of the multifaceted Virgin Group , which
includes Virgin Atlantic Airways , believes that his competitor, Fossett , faces grave risks. ``Because his capsule is not pressurized,'' Branson said in an
interview, `` Steve will have to stay at around 20,000 feet, which
is usually well below the core of the jet stream. That could slow
him down a lot. We will be at 30,000 to 35,000 feet, where our
chances of riding the high-speed jet stream are much better. `` Steve is incredibly brave, and if anyone should beat us, I'd
rather it was he.'' The Dutch team, led by Henk Brink , recently tested the inflation
of its Unicef Flyer balloon at Cape Kennedy in NASA 's huge Vehicle
Assembly Building, where space shuttles are prepared for flight. Brink , who intends to launch his balloon from Nijmegen , the
Netherlands , is a helicopter instructor and veteran balloonist. In 1986 , he, his wife, Evelien , and William Hageman , a Dutch
fighter pilot, became the first European balloonists to cross the Atlantic ; so precise was their navigation that they landed within a
few miles of Brink 's home in the Netherlands . Although balloons must travel in the same direction as the wind
that carries them along, a pilot can navigate to some extent by
changing altitude to seek wind headed in the desired direction.
Even a small change in altitude can result in a large change in
direction. The Unicef Flyer flight suffered a setback Dec. 26 when its
third crew member, Wouter Bakker , resigned from the flight crew
``for personal reasons.'' Days before the expected launching this week , Brink said in an
interview that he had advertised for a replacement, stipulating
that the third crew member should be an airline captain. ``We're down to three candidates,'' Brink said Friday , ``and all
of them are completely familiar with our navigation and
communication equipment. For the launch and landing, I will do the
piloting.'' All three teams are flying Rozier balloons  &MD  a type that has
achieved many long-distance records in recent years. A modern Rozier is kept aloft by helium gas, but to add extra
lift, the balloon is compartmentalized and the lower part can be
filled with hot air from a gas burner. This enables the balloon to
maintain altitude at night, when cold air and the lack of sunlight
cools the helium and lessens its lifting power. Since the first manned balloon flight in 1783 by Jean Francois
Pilatre de Rozier and the Marquis Francois Laurent d'Arlandes in a
Montgolfier hot-air balloon, many balloonists have attempted
round-the-world flights, but all have failed, and some have died
trying. Five unsuccessful attempts were made by a single team led by Larry Newman of Scottsdale , Ariz. , in his Earthwinds balloon before Newman abandoned his efforts one year ago . The Rozier balloon is named after its inventor, who was forced
to use inflammable hydrogen in his 18th-century version, since a
century was to pass before the discovery of nonflammable helium. Rozier was killed in 1785 while trying to cross the English
Channel ; his hydrogen-and-hot-air hybrid balloon caught fire and
crashed. From that time until 1960 , balloonists relied almost exclusively
on hydrogen or helium for lift, since hot-air burners were regarded
as too dangerous. NYT- 01-08-96 1751EST nyt960131.0611 A9510 BC- HILL -OBIT-NYT &LR 01-31 BC- HILL -OBIT-NYT
( Del. , Calif. , Mo. , Mass. , Pa. ATTN) JULIAN HILL , 91, WHO DISCOVERED NYLON
(lb)
By DAVID STOUT c. 1996 N.Y. Times News Service Julian Hill , a research chemist whose accidental discovery of a
tough, taffylike compound revolutionized everyday life after it
proved its worth in warfare and courtship, died on Sunday in Hockessin , Del. He was 91. Hill died at the Cokesbury Village retirement community, where
he had lived in recent years with his wife of 62 years , Polly . During the late 1920s , Hill was a member of a Du Pont Co. team
studying the behavior of certain molecules that chain together to
form larger ones, called polymers. The chemists were engaged in
pure research, though finding a substitute for silk was in the back
of their minds. In 1930 , while trying to create ever larger structures by
adjusting the amount of water in a batch of carbon- and
alcohol-based molecules, the team came up with a concoction that Du
Pont 's research head, Wallace Carothers , thought useless. But Hill was intrigued after sticking a heated glass rod into a
beaker containing the material and finding that it stretched and
pulled, like taffy, and that it became silky when stretched at room
temperature. Soon, Hill and his colleagues were playing with the
material in the corridor and finding that it could be shaped into
strands that were remarkably long and strong. The substance, of course, was nylon, although it would not be so
named until it was introduced at the 1939 World's Fair in New York &MD  hence, the ``ny'' in nylon. ``I tell my wife I was something better than a good scientist,'' Hill recalled in an interview years later. ``I was lucky.'' Since Du Pont held the patents to nylon, Hill made no great fortune off
the discovery, but his wife said Wednesday that the company had
treated him well over the years. (A sad footnote is the fate of Carothers . Beset by personal
problems that fueled depression, thinking himself a failure despite
a brilliant career, he committed suicide in 1937 at the age of 41.) If the development of nylon was in part serendipity, it was not
a total surprise. Almost a decade earlier , at an American Chemical
Society conference in Buffalo , N.Y. , Hill and Carothers reported on
progress in developing ``artificial silks'' like rayon, which was
then coming into use. But rayon is derived from cellulose and in that sense is not
strictly synthetic, as is nylon. Nylon was used initially for
toothbrush bristles, fishing line and surgical sutures. Nylon
stockings were first sold in 1939 . They cost twice what silk
stockings did, and women were happy to pay. Nylon stockings were
sheer and strong. The material was deemed so important that its use was restricted
to the military after the United States entered World War II. Nylon
was used to make rope, tents, aircraft tires and parachutes. It also served to improve British- U.S. relations, in a way.
Young American soldiers stationed in Britain made a good impression
on their dates by giving them nylon stockings, available from the
military's post exchanges when they could not be bought elsewhere. The reintroduction of nylon to civilian life after the war
caused a sensation, and at least one stampede. A crowd of 10,000
people jammed a San Francisco department store in 1945 , causing the
nylon sale to be called off. In the decades since , nylon has become ubiquitous, as carpeting
and clothing. And about two-thirds of all the luggage manufactured
in the world is made from it. Scientists consider nylon a benign product of technology,
because it has not been found to have any deadly side effects. But Hill , who loved wildlife and was a dedicated bird-watcher, said in
a 1988 interview that he thought ``the human race is going to
perish by being smothered in plastic.'' Julian Werner Hill was born in St. Louis , graduated from Washington University there in 1924 and earned a doctorate in
organic chemistry from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1928 . His wife recalled on Wednesday that his doctoral studies were
delayed a year because he was stricken with scarlet fever. Hill played the violin and was an accomplished squash player and
figure-skater until his early 40s , when an attack of polio weakened
one leg, his wife said. Before his retirement from Du Pont in 1964 , Hill supervised the
company's program of aid to universities for research in physics
and chemistry. Surviving besides his wife are a daughter, Louisa Spottswood of Philadelphia ; two sons, Joseph , of Villanova , Pa. , and Jefferson ,
of Washington , and five grandchildren. NYT- 01-31-96 1910EST nyt960207.0657 A6958 BC-DOMINICAN-AIR-CRASH-U 02-07 0674 BC-DOMINICAN-AIR-CRASH-UPDATE2-BLOOM BOEING AIRLINER CRASHES IN CARIBBEAN WITH 189 ABOARD (UPDATE2)
(For use by New York Times News Service clients)
By Michael Molinski c. 1996 Bloomberg Business News (Updates with latest body total, no survivors found; adds that
search was called off for the night , with in second and third
paragraphs; adds report that lightning stuck the craft, German
Foreign Ministry comment response, in seventh paragraph.) Santo Domingo , Dominican Republic , Feb. 7 ( Bloomberg ) -- A
chartered Boeing 757 carrying German tourists from the Dominican
Republic crashed into the Caribbean sea last night , leaving no sign
that any of the 189 people on board survived. The U.S. Coast Guard in Miami said it recovered 79 bodies in the
area of the crash, before suspending its search at nightfall today .
It plans to continue the search in the morning . ``We'll continue searching until there is reason to believe
there are no survivors,'' said Petty Officer Scott Carr , a
spokesman for the Coast Guard , this evening . ``We still maintain
hope that somebody is out there and we will try to find them.'' Searchers did find some life rafts, but no survivors, the Coast
Guard said. It wasn't clear whether the rafts were dragged out by
survivors or if they inflated on impact. U.S. and Dominican Republic officials said the cause of the
crash was unknown. The owner of the German tour agency that
chartered the plane was quoted by Reuters as saying lightning
struck the Frankfurt -bound 757. Vural Oeger , head of Hamburg -based Oeger Tours , said he was told
by Dominican aviation officials that the plane's engines were
damaged by lightning. Reuters also said the pilots apparently tried
to turn the plane around to return to the airport, but were unable
to and plunged into the Caribbean . A spokeswoman for the German Foreign Ministry said that while
she'd heard rumors of lightning causing the wreck, she couldn't
confirm the reports. The plane crashed just before midnight local time last night ,
about five minutes after taking off from the Puerto Plata airport
in the Dominican Republic . Coast Guard officials said rain and
sharks were hampering the rescue efforts. A spokesman for the Seattle -based Boeing Co. said it was sending
a team to help investigate the crash. The aircraft, owned by Turkish company Birgen Air , was leased to Alas de Transporte Internacional , a Dominican charter airline that
operates mainly during the peak winter season when European
tourists visit the resort town of Puerto Plata , said a spokeswoman
for Aeronautica Civil , the Dominican Republic 's aviation agency. Oeger had chartered the plane from Alas . The aircraft, built in 1985 , carried 176 passengers, most of
them German tourists, and 13 crew members -- 11 Turkish nationals
and two Dominicans. Russ Young , a Boeing spokesman, said the investigation could
last weeks or months. The jet was the 31st Boeing 757 made and was originally sold to Eastern Air Lines , of Miami , which became a subsidiary of Texas Air
Corp. after filing for bankruptcy in 1989 . Martin Brodie , a spokesman for Rolls-Royce Plc in London , said
the plane was fitted with Rolls-Royce RB211-535 engines. He said
the power plant was ``one of the most reliable engines in
service.'' The company had no idea yet what went wrong and there was no
immediate evidence that the engines were to blame. The crash was the second of a 757 in less than two months . On Dec. 20 , an American Airlines jet crashed in the mountains near Cali , Colombia , killing 160 of the 164 people on board. The cause
of that crash is still under investigation. The Dominican Republic , which shares the island of Hispaniola with Haiti , is the most popular Caribbean destination for Germans.
Hundreds of thousands of German tourists visit the island each
year, attracted by its low prices and tropical beaches. Oeger is one of a number of discount tour agencies in Germany which charters planes to the Dominican Republic . NYT- 02-07-96 2013EST nyt960208.0062 A7267 BC-DOMINICAN-CRASH-ART-2 02-08 0877 BC-DOMINICAN-CRASH-ART-2NDLD-WRITETHRU-650&ADD-NYT
(Subs 1st graf to update number of bodies recovered)
GERMAN TOURIST PLANE CRASHES; 189 FEARED DEAD
(ART ADV: Graphic and locator-map have been sent to NYT graphic
clients. Non-subscribers can make individual purchase by calling
212-556-4204 or 1927.)
(JT)
By MATTHEW L. WALD c. 1996 N.Y. Times News Service WASHINGTON &MD  A Boeing 757 carrying 189 people, mostly tourists
on their way home to Berlin and Frankfurt from the Dominican
Republic , crashed into the Atlantic late Tuesday about 13 miles
offshore. At least 105 bodies were recovered, American officials
said. Debris was spread in an area two miles long and 150 yards wide,
the United States Coast Guard said, suggesting that the jet broke
up before it hit the water. But an official at the German Embassy in Santo Domingo , the
capital of the Dominican Republic , said the fuel had not caught
fire, indicating that the plane had not exploded. The official, the first secretary at the embassy, said bad
weather was likely the cause. ``More than 50 percent , it was the interference of bad
weather,'' the official, Klaus D. Brock , said in a telephone
interview. The plane had taken off from Puerto Plata , about 100
miles northwest of Santo Domingo . The crash was the second recent loss of a Boeing 757 in flight:
In December a 757 crashed near Cali , Colombia ; pilot error appears
to have been the primary cause. Aviation officials in Puerto Plata gave conflicting information Wednesday about the flight, which reached an altitude of about
7,000 feet before crashing. Gen. Hector Ramon , head of the civil aviation agency, said the
pilot had radioed the tower that he had a problem and was
returning, news reports said. But Maj. Emmanuel Souffront , of the Dominican Air Force , said a transcript of radio communication with
air traffic controllers indicated there had not been a problem. ``The aircraft started to turn to the right and disappeared from
the radar screen,'' he was quoted as saying. ``Before it went down, someone radioed from the aircraft, `Stand
by.''' In Berlin and Frankfurt , friends and family of the passengers
arrived at the airports to find flags flying at half staff and
teams of doctors, psychologists and clergy to meet them. The 11-year-old plane, originally built for Eastern Air Lines ,
was owned by a Turkish company and under lease, with a crew, to a
Dominican airline, Alas de Transporte Internacional , for a single
flight. It carried 176 passengers, including 4 children. Eleven of
the crew were Turkish and two Dominican. The Turkish company, Birgen Air , was using the plane to fill a
charter commitment to a German company, Oger Tours of Hamburg . Wolfgang Schwalm , a spokesman for the Frankfurt airport, said the Boeing 757 had replaced a Boeing 767 at the last minute because the
767 had technical problems. In Istanbul , the general manager of Birgen said on television
that he believed the plane had been hit by lightning. But the jet
is designed to withstand any such strikes. The United States Coast Guard dispatched three cutters to help
retrieve bodies. Germany sent two civil aviation officials and
three officials from the federal police in Weisbaden to help
identify bodies. The Federal Aviation Administration said it would send experts
to assist investigators, and the National Transportation Safety
Board said it would send investigators if more evidence became
available. But it was not clear who would pay to retrieve the plane's data
recorder from the wreckage, off the north coast of the Dominican
Republic where the water is about 3,000 feet deep. Retrieval could
cost hundreds of thousands of dollars . Though the plane was
American built, neither it nor the airline nor the flight was under
American jurisdiction, and no Americans were on board. Nevertheless, American safety experts said they would be very
interested in learning more about the crash if it was caused by
mechanical problems or by weather. NYT- 02-08-96 0216EST nyt960208.0763 A8248 BC-DOMINICAN-CRASH-NYT &LR 02-08 BC-DOMINICAN-CRASH-NYT NAVY TO HUNT FOR BLACK BOX FROM AIR CRASH
(HLW)
By MATTHEW L. WALD c. 1996 N.Y. Times News Service UPPER MARLBORO , Md. &MD  The Navy said here on Thursday that it had
shipped equipment to the Dominican Republic to help find the flight
data recorder of the Boeing 757 that crashed offshore on Tuesday night , killing all 189 people on board. Navy officials said they had been asked to locate the so-called
black box, but so far have not been asked to help retrieve it or
any other parts of the wreckage. In the meantime, discussions
continued about who would pay to salvage parts of the jet. The Turkish-owned charter jet, which was leased to a Dominican
airline, was carrying German tourists home from a Caribbean vacation when it plunged into the Atlantic shortly after takeoff
from Puerto Plata in the Dominican Republic . Late on Thursday afternoon in Puerto Plata , the Coast Guard said
it had given up its search, and it remained uncertain exactly how
many bodies had been accounted for. Dominican officials said 128 bodies had been recovered. A Pentagon spokesman said local people in boats appeared to have
stripped some bodies of money and identification. After the crash, the Dominican Republic asked for help from the National Transportation Safety Board , which in turn called in the Navy . Capt. Raymond Scott McCord , supervisor of the Navy 's salvage and
diving operations, said at a briefing here on Thursday that the Boeing 757 went down in an area where the water is from 1,000 feet
to 13,000 feet deep, with the sea bottom flat in some parts and
jagged in others. Although McCord said the Navy had retrieved wreckage in more
challenging places, he declined to predict the likelihood of
success in recovering the black box in this case, or what it would
cost. The black boxes on passenger jets are equipped with metal
cylinders that emit a ``ping'' sound when immersed in water. So far, the Navy has sent a Towed Ping Locator System, also
known as a tow fish, to the area. The device is pulled on a cable,
about 2,500 feet above the ocean floor, at 2 to 3 knots, and,
depending on water conditions, it can hear the pinger on the black
box at a distance of up to a mile. Navy officials and aviation experts plan to review air traffic
control radar and other data in an effort to narrow the search
area. When they finish, probably on Tuesday or Wednesday , they will
begin surveying the ocean, he said. ``Looking for anything on the ocean floor is very difficult,
because you are working blind,'' he said. ``The analogy is a needle
in a haystack. But with a pinger locator, you know which side of
the haystack you're looking at.'' The Navy also showed off a bigger robot probe that would carry
out the next step, making sonar maps of the bottom, to locate the
debris fields. A third remote-controlled device, with video and
still cameras and manipulator arms, would then be sent down. All
three are towed by a ship, and the Navy is now negotiating with
commercial ship owners for a suitable vessel, McCord said. No one would say what such an operation would cost. At the National Transportation Safety Board , Michael Benson , a
spokesman, said, ``any costs are expected to be incurred on a
cost-sharing basis.'' ``We certainly have a strong interest in that aircraft; it's our
aircraft,'' he said. ``There are others who have an equally strong interest,'' he
said, citing ``countries and corporate entities.'' These would
apparently include Germany , Turkey , the Dominican Republic , Boeing , Alas de Transporte Internacional , which leased the plane, and Birgenair , a small Turkish company that owned the plane and
provided the crew. NYT- 02-08-96 2101EST nyt960222.0661 A3301 BC- COLOMBIA -AIRCRASH-NYT 02-22 0719 BC- COLOMBIA -AIRCRASH-NYT
(EXCLUSIVE; 10 p.m. ET EMBARGO)
JET THAT CRASHED IN COLOMBIA REPORTEDLY STRIPPED OF PARTS
(HLW)
By MATTHEW L. WALD c. 1996 N.Y. Times News Service WASHINGTON &MD  Scavengers have descended on the wreckage of the American Airlines jetliner that crashed in Colombia last December ,
making off with more than 500 parts, including the jet engines, the
landing gear, and electronic components for possible sale to other
carriers, the airline said. A spokesman for the airline said that to its knowledge, no parts
of the plane had yet been offered for sale, and on Thursday the Federal Aviation Administration said it was notifying other
airlines of the possibility. Not long after the Boeing 757 jetliner crashed last Dec. 20 in a
remote mountain area near Buga , Colombia , killing 160 of the 164
people on board, the Colombian authorities said people were taking
valuables from the bodies of the dead passengers as well as the
luggage. Last month , the airline sent other airlines and aviation
companies an 11-page list of the missing parts and their serial
numbers along with a letter warning: ``These parts could pose a
significant safety risk should they be installed on other aircraft
since they were involved in a crash.'' John Hotard , a spokesman for American , said by telephone: ``You
may have a part that looks perfectly good on the outside, but if
you get into some of the sophisticated testing, you may find out
it's not good.'' Although the plane was a Boeing 757, flying from Miami to Cali ,
many of the parts would also fit a Boeing 767. The airline's letter, first reported in The Cleveland Plain
Dealer, noted: ``Any part taken from the crash site and/or offered
for sale without the express written approval of American Airlines
Inc. , should be considered a stolen aircraft part.'' It cited
sections of federal law that made such activity illegal and
threatened that any supplier caught handling any of the parts would
be barred from doing business with American . Hotard said that American was not interested in the salvage
value of the parts but that some could be sold for a lot of money
if passed off as being in good condition. Testifying before a Senate aviation subcommittee last June , federal investigators said
various small parts of airplanes that are worth hundreds of dollars in new condition, are available for a few dollars from scrap
dealers in the United States and may find their way back into
airplanes, although the parts are not suitable. The local Colombian authorities did retrieve the black boxes
with cockpit voice and flight data recordings, and technicians at
the National Transportation Safety Board in Washington have
analyzed them. The safety board and the Colombian authorities
recently said there did not appear to be any mechanical problem
with the plane before the crash. That means that the stolen parts would probably not be useful in
determining the cause of this crash. In some other crashes,
investigators have sorted through tons of debris to find components
that offer clues. Stealing parts from crash scenes is not new. When a Colombian
DC-8 cargo plane crashed on Feb. 5 in Asuncion , Paraguay , killing
23 people, local television showed a man stealing engine parts from
the debris, The Associated Press reported. In the United States ,
crash scenes are usually cordoned off, in part to protect the
evidence and to prevent the spread of blood-borne infection. A spokesman for the Boeing Co. , Richard F. Schleh , said the
company had helped American distribute its letter, which he
described as ``a very good precautionary effort.'' Margaret Gilligan , the deputy associate administrator for
regulation and certification at the aviation agency, said the
agency did not believe that parts had been stolen from planes that
had crashed in this country, but she said the agency did not know
what happened abroad. William A. Machado , who heads an FAA program to investigate
aircraft parts that are counterfeit or come from unapproved
suppliers, said of the American letter: ``It's the first time I've
seen it, but I can understand their concern, because they really
didn't have a lot of control.'' Machado called the letter ``a
responsible action on their part.'' NYT- 02-22-96 2132EST nyt960224.0155 A4844 BC- NAVY -JET-CRASHES-NYT &LR 02-24 BC- NAVY -JET-CRASHES-NYT NAVY RESTRICTS FLIGHTS OF TROUBLE-PLAGUED F-14
(kd)
By PHILIP SHENON c. 1996 N.Y. Times News Service WASHINGTON &MD  The Navy imposed new restrictions Saturday on
pilots who fly the F-14 jet fighter, after three of the
trouble-plagued jets crashed in the last month , killing four Navy airmen and three civilians. While the Navy said it had found no common thread in the recent
crashes, it announced that it had placed temporary limitations on
the speed at which F-14s could be flown, and on the use of
afterburners, which give a plane extra thrust by injecting fuel
into hot exhaust gases. All F-14 pilots will also be required to undergo refresher
safety courses before they are allowed to fly again, a requirement
that could keep some grounded for several more days . The Navy made the announcement as it ended a three-day worldwide
shutdown on operations of the carrier-based F-14 Tomcat. In recent years the Navy 's fleet of more than 330 F-14s has
suffered a series of catastrophic accidents, including a crash on Jan. 29 in which one of the early models of the fighter, an F-14A,
smashed into a residential neighborhood in Nashville , killing the
two-man crew and three civilians on the ground. On Feb. 18 , one of the latest models, an F-14D, went down off
the coast of southern California , killing its two-person crew. On Thursday , an F-14A crashed into the Persian Gulf ; the pilot
and radar operator survived with only minor injuries. The F-14 has the highest accident rate among Navy combat planes,
and its problems have mounted even as the overall safety record for Navy planes has improved dramatically in recent years. Ten F-14s
have gone down in the past two years , and 32 since 1991 . Each plane
costs more than $30 million . In announcing the three-day halt to operations last week , the
Chief of Naval Operations , Adm. Jeremy M. Boorda , said that the
F-14 was ``an airplane that we worry about.'' Earlier models of the
plane had engines that were not powerful enough for a fighter of
its size, which led to restrictions on their use and, in some
cases, replacement of the engine. In a statement Saturday , the Navy said that the new restrictions
on speed and on the use of afterburners would remain in effect
until the investigations of the three recent crashes had ended. The
statement did not rule out permanent restrictions in the future. ``It should be emphasized that the investigations continue to
determine causes and any permanent corrective action required,''
the Navy said. ``The requirements and limitations placed in effect today are intended to permit safe operation of the F-14 aircraft
pending completion of the investigations.'' Under the restrictions, F-14 fighters cannot fly more than 550
nautical miles an hour, below an altitude of 10,000 feet.
Restrictions on the use of afterburners apply to later models of
the plane. Navy officials said Saturday that the restrictions would not
affect the plane's usefulness, since the limitations would be
immediately waived in combat. ``If a pilot is out there and needs
to fly his airplane, he's going to fly his airplane as he needs
to,'' said a Navy spokesman. The House National Security Committee has announced that
hearings would be held next week on the safety record of the F-14.
The panel is expected to hear testimony from Navy officials, pilots
and representatives of the manufacturer, the Grumman Corp. , which
merged with Northrop in 1994 . The two House Republicans who are sponsoring the hearings, Duncan Hunter and Randy Cunningham , both from California , said in a
statement that ``too many lives and too much equipment has been
lost'' in F-14 crashes. Although the plane's problems precede the Clinton administration by many years, the lawmakers said that they
planned to investigate whether the administration ``is underfunding
both the readiness and modernization of Navy aircraft.'' NYT- 02-24-96 1657EST nyt960301.0672 A1897 BC-737-AIRCRASH-PROBE-NY 03-01 0700 BC-737-AIRCRASH-PROBE-NYT
RARE TESTING ON A 737 SEEKS ELUSIVE ANSWERS TO A CRASH
(bl)
By MATTHEW L. WALD c. 1996 N.Y. Times News Service WASHINGTON &MD  Air safety investigators have begun highly unusual
tests on a parked Boeing 737, forcing parts askew with hydraulic
arms and clipping vital control cables in an effort to determine
why a sister plane owned by USAir fell out of the sky near Pittsburgh in September 1994 . The investigation of that crash, which killed all 132 people on
board, is already the most extensive in the history of the National
Transportation Safety Board . And in a way it is the most worrisome,
because the 737 is the most popular jet in the sky. The board finds the cause of almost all crashes by looking at
the wreckage, the flight data recorders, radar records and similar
evidence. But in this case, that has not been enough in this case. ``What we're doing to this airplane is unprecedented,'' said James Hall , the safety board's chairman. Hall said investigators had already invested more than 50,000
hours of engineering time in trying to find the cause of the crash,
making the inquiry the longest and costliest in the board's 29-year history. The 737 that crashed was approaching Pittsburgh when it abruptly
rolled to the left and plunged to the ground at 300 miles an hour. Investigators say that its trajectory through the sky can be
explained by a sustained swing of the rudder  &MD  the moveable surface
on the vertical tail  &MD  and by nothing else that they can identify. It is not clear, though, how the rudder could have
malfunctioned. So technicians have pulled the floor out of the passenger cabin
of the test plane, enabling them to see the cables that link the
pedals at the pilot's feet with the rudder in the back of the
plane. If the cables do not snap because of the forces applied to them
during the tests, engineers will cut them and measure the sound.
The goal is to try to duplicate sounds captured by the cockpit
voice recorder just before the crash, and to see what effect a
snapped cable might have had on the plane. The investigators are using a plane that USAir had removed from
service and is planning to donate to the Museum of Flight , in Seattle . The museum is across a runway from a Boeing plant, and Boeing is assisting in the new experiments. The plane that crashed carried an early-model flight data
recorder, which captured only 11 kinds of data. It did not record
the position of the rudder or of the rudder controls. In contrast,
newer data recorders capture dozens of kinds of data, and usually
point investigators toward the root of the problem very quickly. For example, the recorder in the Boeing 757 that crashed off the
coast of the Dominican Republic last month had 72 kinds of data. Speaking by telephone from Seattle as the tests began Thursday , Hall said, ``I just hope the aircraft industry and the Federal
Aviation Administration will take appropriate action so we are
never in a position again where it would take us this much time and
effort.'' But the airlines argue that wiring planes to capture more data
would require taking them out of service for long periods, at high
cost. The plane being used for the new tests has been extensively
outfitted with instruments. ``It looks like somebody on life
support,'' said Hall , referring to the bundles of wires that are
now attached. Investigators are looking for some combination of problems on
three systems that can move the plane: the main rudder-control
mechanism, a backup mechanism and a yaw damper, which is a
computer-operated automatic system that makes small adjustments in
the rudder to keep the plane's nose and tail lined up in precisely
the direction that the plane is moving. One reason for the new tests is that investigators say they may
not fully understand the significance of an event that occurred
just before the crash: the USAir plane ran over the wake of a Boeing 737 flying 4.2 nautical miles ahead. Such wake encounters are common, but investigators think this
one may have put a force on the plane that somehow triggered a
fatal chain of events. NYT- 03-01-96 2134EST nyt960301.0686 A1908 BC-AIRLINE-CRASHES-SPI &LR 03-01 BC-AIRLINE-CRASHES-SPI
LATEST CRASHES RENEW CONCERNS ABOUT AVIATION SAFETY
(For use by New York Times News Service clients.)
By BILL VIRGIN c. 1996 Seattle Post-Intelligencer SEATTLE &MD  Commercial aviation worldwide is off to a rocky start
in 1996 , with two major crashes this month alone claiming 312
lives. Other forms of transportation aren't faring much better. In the United States alone, railroad accidents have accounted for 19
deaths, 226 injuries and more than $62 million in damage, National
Transportation Safety Board Chairman James Hall said this week . And while crashes of airline flights get the most attention,
general aviation is usually deadlier. Last year , the NTSB says, 732
people died in general aviation accidents, compared with 175 deaths
from accidents involving scheduled U.S. airlines. For the worst
carnage, America 's highways are still unrivaled, with 40,000 deaths
reported from motor vehicle accidents each year. Still, news of jet crashes renew questions and concerns about
aviation safety, particularly when it comes in spates and
particularly in a city like Seattle , home to the world's biggest
manufacturer of commercial jet aircraft. The crash of a passenger jet anywhere ``is something that
galvanizes attention,'' said John Nance , an aviation safety expert
and writer. The latest crash  &MD  that of a Faucett Airlines -operated Boeing 737 in Peru , which killed 123 aboard  &MD  came on the heels of an NTSB news conference in Seattle this week detailing its lack of success
in finding a cause for two U.S. crashes of Boeing 737s, one in 1991 , the other in 1994 . Those two crashes are linked by the remaining mystery of the
cause, the fact both involved 737s and the suspicion both crashes
may be linked to a sudden movement of the rudder, sending the
planes into uncontrollable rolls. But there seems to be little commonality in the three most
recent crashes, either by plane type or suspected cause. The crash
of an American Airlines Boeing 757 in Colombia in December , which
killed 160 people, occurred as the plane was approaching the
airport; pilot error is suspected. A Feb. 6 crash of a Birgen Air -owned Boeing 757 occurred as the
plane was taking off from the Dominican Republic ; that crash
claimed 189 lives. Authorities in the Dominican Republic say the
recorded air speed indicator at the time the plane stopped climbing
was much higher than what ground radar showed, which would suggest
pilots thought they were going faster  &MD  and had more power to climb
 &MD  than they actually did. The investigation has just begun in the Peru crash, but some
witnesses say the plane was on fire before it hit the ground. Nance said there's no apparent common thread running through
those three accidents. ``The only other common denominator (would
be) the human factor, and it's been known for a long time that
human factors account for 90 percent of accidents,'' he said.
``It's still the thing that gets us. We're getting better at it,
but we're not as perfect as the machines we build.'' Boeing has assisted in the investigation of the Dominican
Republic crash and spokesman Russ Young said a team is being sent
to Peru . Until the Colombia crash, the 757 hadn't been involved in any
fatal crashes in its 13 years of flying. The 737, which in various
models has been in service for 28 years , is the world's
best-selling commercial aircraft. The Federal Aviation Administration hasn't issued any directives
in relation to the three most recent crashes. ``It's way too early
for that,'' said FAA spokesman Tim Pile . ``We would need some kind
of formal finding, unless it was really obvious there was some
problem with the aircraft.'' Last year , the International Civil Aviation Organization reported, there were 26 accidents involving scheduled aircraft,
resulting in 710 fatalities; that was down from 941 the year
before . NYT- 03-01-96 2147EST nyt960403.0586 A7900 BC-CRASH-PLANE-NYT &LR 04-03 BC-CRASH-PLANE-NYT
TWO PRIOR CRASHES OF 737S STILL UNSOLVED
(With CRASH- BROWN -NYT)
(HLW)
By MATTHEW L. WALD c. 1996 N.Y. Times News Service WASHINGTON &MD  The Air Force plane that crashed in Croatia on Wednesday was a modified version of the Boeing 737, a widely used
aircraft with one of the best safety records in the air. But two
unexplained crashes in the last five years , in Pittsburgh and Colorado Springs , have raised questions about the 737's
performance. Like the plane that crashed on Wednesday , those aircraft crashed
while approaching airports for landing. But it is not known if
there are any similarities between the crashes in the United States and the crash in Croatia . The investigators in the crash on Wednesday may be lacking one
basic tool available to those probing the civilian crashes. The Air
Force public affairs office at the Pentagon said that the plane,
like many of its aircraft, did not carry a cockpit voice recorder
or a flight data recorder, which are commonly known as black boxes.
However, a spokesman for the U.S. European Command , in Stuttgart , Germany , contradicted that, saying such equipment was aboard. The Pittsburgh crash, of a USAir flight from Chicago that
crashed on an airport approach in 1994 , is the most intensively
studied crash in the history of American civil aviation, but safety
experts still do not know what caused it. The Colorado Springs crash, in 1991 , is also unexplained; transportation officials hope
the investigation of the Pittsburgh crash will help explain it. The 737 is the single most popular commercial jet, and it makes
up about a quarter of the American airline jet fleet. Boeing has
sold over 1,100 of the 737-200s, the model that crashed on Wednesday , and over 2,800 of all types of 737s, with 500 more on
order. The Air Force bought 19, including the one that crashed on Wednesday , for $5.4 million each, and they were delivered in 1973 and 1974 . Most are used for training navigators. Until Wednesday ,
the Air Force had never had a crash involving the planes, or indeed
any incident that resulted in a death or permanent disability. The plane that crashed had recorded 12,000 landings and 17,000
hours of flight, which made it a relatively young aircraft, said
Maj. Laura J. Feldman , a spokesman for the Air Force . The plane was
flying from Tuzla to Dubrovnik , a 45-minute trip. Among the characteristics that make the 737 desirable for the Air Force is its ability to operate from short, rough airfields. The plane that crashed, called a T-43 by the Air Force , was set
up to carry about 60 passengers. It had fewer windows than the
airline model and some extra electronic equipment protruding from
its stubby, 100-foot-long body. The plane had been used in Bosnia in recent weeks to ferry
American and NATO dignitaries to and from airports where many
runways have been scarred by civil war. Air Force officials say
that Secretary of State Warren Christopher flew aboard the plane
during a visit to the Balkans earlier this year . The plane had been used earlier this week to ferry Defense Secretary William Perry on trips within the Balkans &MD  from Zagreb ,
the Croatian capital, to Tuzla and Sarajevo in Bosnia , and then to Tirana , Albania , and from Albania to Cairo on Tuesday . Military
officials said that the plane then returned to Zagreb to pick up Commerce Secretary Ron Brown and his delegation. For security, the crew minimized time at low altitudes, to limit
the possibility of the plane being hit by gunfire or shells fired
by rebel forces, according to officials. The plane, clearly marked with a U.S. flag on its tail and the
bold lettering `` United States of America '' on its side, was based
at Ramstein Air Base , in Germany , as was its crew. The civilian
version has a crew of three; the Air Force said that the plane that
crashed had six crewmen on board. Investigators working on the Pittsburgh crash say they believe
that the aircraft's trajectory on Wednesday can be explained only
by a sudden, full swing of the rudder on its tail, but the parts
that survived the wreckage do not provide any physical evidence
that this actually occurred, and the flight data recorder was not
sophisticated enough to record the information. The National Transportation Safety Board , the independent
federal agency in charge of investigating civilian aircraft
accidents, hopes to finish the investigation and reach a conclusion this year . Apart from Colorado Springs and Pittsburgh , the agency has only
three unsolved crashes in its 29-year history. The Safety Board is sending several investigators with the
military team to look into the crash. NYT- 04-03-96 2047EST